Objective:- Assignments will help trainees to understand the basics of unix command and how to explore and use it.

DO NOT copy paste commands from internet, you can take help of the Unix in-built command manual.

Be Honest to yourself!

Important command and option to learn unix commands:-
man Command
Example:-
man ls

--help Option
Example:-
ls --help

NOTE:- Always use "man" command before using any unix commands and read about it and its options and how to use it.

Assignments:-

List the contents of a directory and their attributes
ls

Long list the content with file, directory ownership, permissions,sizes, etc…
ls -l

Display the size of the file in human readable format
ls -h

Show all files and folders including hidden one
ls -la

list directories recursively
ls -R /tmp/dir1

Sort the files by size with largest at the top
ls -S -l

Sort the files by last time modified displaying the newest first.
ls -S

Diplay the location of a program/command, where it is installed.
pwd

Which command is used to switch directory from one to another
cd

List all the environment variables set for the current shell environment
env or printenv

Did you notice something in the output of "env" command?
Yes

Which command is used to print the text or any variables value in the Console/Terminal?
echo

Print the value of the env variable "PATH" on the console
echo $PATH

Is linux a case-sensitive operating system?
yes, Its a case -sensitive

Is, "Ls" same as "ls"?
No

Display your currently logged in user
whoami

how do you change the currrently logged in user to another user?
su neha

Which command is used to leave a shell environment that you are currently logged in to?
cd

How do you reboot the system?
sudo reboot

How do you shutdown the system?
shutdown -h now

Display all the major running processes in the system?
ps aux or ps -A

Understand the output of command used in above question of displaying processes, explain the meaning of each column and what data it displays?

Display the name of the system kernel
uname -s

display the kernel release number
uname -r

display teh machine type of the current kernel
uname -m

Display the name of the operating system that the kernel is running on
uname -o

Display all info that uname command can show.
uname -a

Display the name of directory that you are currently pointing to
pwd

change the current directory to another directory that you have in your system.
cd /bin

Go up one directory
cd ..

Return to last directory
cd -

change the current directory to home(logged in user's) directory
cd ~ or cd

How to check all the command used from the prompt (Command History)
history

In which file the history of commands are stored in?
.bash_history

How many lines of history does the system keep and from where you can change it?
1000

How can you modify bash's history behaviour

Display all the commands entered so far, now, try to run a particular command from the history list without typing that command.

NOTE:- TAB key is your friend when it comes to command completion and having long file and directory names autocompleted at the bash prompt for you. JUST BE LAZY AND USE TAB KEY FOR AUTO COMPLETION ;-)

What are the different types of shell and where are they used and how do we use them?

1. The Bourne Shell
The Bourne shell (sh), written by Steve Bourne at AT&T Bell Labs, is the original UNIX shell. It is the preferred shell for shell programming because of its compactness and speed. A Bourne shell drawback is that it lacks features for interactive use, such as the ability to recall previous commands (history). The Bourne shell also lacks built-in arithmetic and logical expression handling.

The Bourne shell is the Solaris OS default shell. It is the standard shell for Solaris system administration scripts. For the Bourne shell the:

Command full-path name is /bin/sh and /sbin/sh.
Non-root user default prompt is $.
Root user default prompt is #.

2. The C Shell
The C shell (csh):

Is a UNIX enhancement written by Bill Joy at the University of California at Berkeley.
Incorporated features for interactive use, such as aliases and command history.
Includes convenient programming features, such as built-in arithmetic and a C-like expression syntax.

For the C shell the:

Command full-path name is /bin/csh.
Non-root user default prompt is hostname %.
Root user default prompt is hostname #.

3. The Korn Shell
The Korn shell (ksh):

Was written by David Korn at AT&T Bell Labs
Is a superset of the Bourne shell.
Supports everything in the Bourne shell.
Has interactive features comparable to those in the C shell.
Includes convenient programming features like built-in arithmetic and C-like arrays, functions, and string-manipulation facilities.
Is faster than the C shell.
Runs scripts written for the Bourne shell.

For the Korn shell the:

Command full-path name is /bin/ksh.
Non-root user default prompt is $.
Root user default prompt is #.

4. The GNU Bourne-Again Shell
The GNU Bourne-Again shell (bash):

Is compatible to the Bourne shell.
Incorporates useful features from the Korn and C shells.
Has arrow keys that are automatically mapped for command recall and editing.
For the GNU Bourne-Again shell the:

Command full-path name is /bin/bash.
Default prompt for a non-root user is bash-x.xx$. (Where x.xx indicates the shell version number. For example, bash-3.50$)
Root user default prompt is bash-x.xx#. (Where x.xx indicates the shell version number. For example, bash-3.50$#)

What is the difference between login shell and non-login shell?
login shell: A login shell is the first process that executes under your user ID when you log in for an interactive session. 
             and A login shell is one whose first character of argument zero is a -, or one started with the --login option.

Non-login shell : A shell started in a new terminal in a GUI would be an interactive non-login shell.
                  It would source your .bashrc, but not your .profile, for example

How do we start login shell and non-login shell?
su - {username}
su -l {username}
su --login {username}

non-login:
ssh example.com <my-script-which-is-stored-locally

What happens when you start a login shell (which files are read and used and Why)?
it reads the /etc/profile and its user-specific equivalent 

What happens when you start a non-login shell (Which files are read and used and Why)?

What are Shell Configuration Files, why do we need it?
The /etc/profile file – it stores system-wide environment configurations and startup programs for login setup. 
All configurations that you want to apply to all system users' environments should be added in this file

Explain the Order of file usage from the system/user's home directory when user logs in to the System.

What are Shell Variables, list major shell variables and what do they represent?
Shell Variables − A shell variable is a special variable that is set by the shell and is required by the shell in order to function correctly. 
                  Some of these variables are environment variables whereas others are local variables.

$HOME	Absolute pathname to your home directory.
$PATH	List of directories to search for commands.
$USER	Your user name.
$SHELL	Absolute pathname of your login shell.
$TERM	The type of your terminal.


How we see all our env variables?
printenv

How we see all env variables in alphabical order?

What Format does the env var and its values are stored?
key=value format

How do you create your own varible?
myvar=hello

How do you start a new bash shell?

Difference between Local/Shell variables to Global Variable

Making a variable accessible from other the shell in the system.

Show the real life use case of exporting a variable

Convert the above script file into a command, The file should run with "myappp" instead of "myapp.sh"

What is Globbing? Explain in depth with examples?

List all entries with extension ".sh"
ls -ltr *.sh

List all entries with numbers in it.

List all entries that starts with a character and ends with a number

List all entries that name length more than 5 characters

What is Quoting? and Why do we need it?

Write few(minimum 3) unique examples that shows, how a particular problem is solved using Quoting.

How do you find a particular files/directories based on a particular search criteria?
HINT:- look for commands -> locate, find and whereis

Write major difference between locate, find and whereis?

How Globbing is different from locate, find and whereis?

Explain the Linux File System.

Explain absolute and Relative Paths

What are the different ways of creating a File in linux System? Write an example of each and the difference between them.
vi abc.txt
nano abc.txt


In how many ways we can delete the files from linux system? write an example of each and teh difference between them.
rm fileNAME

Archiving files using linux command, write a command to archive set of files from linux commands.

Extract the archived files from the above step.